Average life expectancy at birth for English people in the late
16th and early 17th centuries was just under 40 – 39.7 years.
However, this low figure was mostly due to the high rate
of infant and child mortality; over 12% of all children born
would die in their first year. A man or woman who reached
the age of 30 could expect to live to 59. Life expectancy in
New England was much higher, where the average man lived
to his mid-sixties and women lived on average to 62.

Demographers estimate that approximately 2% of all live
births in England at this time would die in the first day of life.
By the end of the first week, a cumulative total of 5% would
die. Another 3 or 4% would die within the month. A total of
12 or 13% would die within their first year. With the hazards
of infancy behind them, the death rate for children slowed
but continued to occur. A cumulative total of 36% of children
died before the age of six, and another 24% between the ages
of seven and sixteen. In all, of 100 live births, 60 would die
before the age of 16.

Family Size
An English woman who married at the average age of 23
½ could expect a reproductive span of about 20 years. In
New England, where women typically married at 20 or 21,
the potential years for giving birth increased by those two or
three years. The typical English woman would give birth six or
seven times. The average number of children born to a New
England couple was slightly over eight. While this difference
is not striking, the difference lay in the number of children
who survived to adulthood. In 17th-century England, the
average household size was 4.75 persons.

Death in childhood:
The following diseases, while affecting all ages, were common
causes of death in childhood. Whooping cough, diphtheria,
dysentery, tuberculosis, typhus, typhoid fever, rickets, chicken
pox, measles, scarlet fever, smallpox and plague under their
period names, were all listed as causes of death in children.

Relatively few deaths were caused by accidents. The most
common of these was drowning. Small children fell into
laundry tubs, or played too close to ditches, ponds and wells.
Older children died while playing near water, swimming or
bathing, or while working. Both boys and girls living near
the shore gathered shellfish and were swept in by waves. Boys
drowned while fishing or gathering reeds. Older girls slipped
into pits, ditches or ponds while drawing water. Burning was
a less common cause of death, although babies left in cradles
near the fire or unsupervised toddlers were at risk. Finally,
children were occasionally killed by being run over by a cart
or horse, or hit by a falling object. 